---
layout: docs
title: "OneJoker: Intallation"
---

h1. Installing a pre-built library

You can use the OneJoker library in your own code without having to build it from source by installing a pre-compiled binary.

h2. Python 3

Even if you plan to use to OneJoker library for Java or C programming, you will need to have the Python 3 language installed on your computer to run some of the utilities, including the installer.

h3. Windows

The "standard" implementation of Python 3 can be downloaded from ["python.org":http://python.org/download/releases/]. Many people prefer ["ActivePython":http://www.activestate.com/activepython/downloads]. Either will work just fine. Once you have installed Python 3, continue to ["downloading":#downloading], below.

h3. Linux

Most current Linux distributions come with Python 2 installed, but not Python 3, so you'll have to install it (the two get along pretty well together on the same machine). Complicating matters a little more, some distrubutions fail to include the standard "tkinter" module that is part of the language, requiring you to install that separately. On Ubuntu Linux, for example, you'll have to install two packages, like this:

{% highlight bash %}
sudo apt-get install python3 python3-tk
{% endhighlight %}

<a id="downloading"></a>

h2. Downloading

h3. Windows

Download "this zipfile":/OneJoker/binaries/onejoker-win32-0.0.1.zip and unpack it. The installer is the program @install.pyw@. If you have Python 3 installed correctly, you can run this either by simply clicking on it or by typing @pythonw install.pyw@, assuming your PATH and other environment is set up to point to Python 3.

The installer will make its best guess about where to install the C library, Java classes, and Python module. If your installation of those languages differs from that guess, change the directories as needed before pressing the "Install" button.

h3. Linux

h4. Option 1: Install to @/usr/local/lib@

Download "this zipfile":/OneJoker/binaries/onejoker-linux-x86-0.0.1.zip and unpack it. This will give you a file @libonejoker.so.0.0.1@. If directory @/usr/local/lib@ does not exist, create it. Copy the library there, and make two symbolic links to it (you'll probably need @sudo@ for this and some of the following commands). Finally, tell the OS to re-cache libraries using @ldconfig@:

{% highlight bash %}
cp libonejoker.so.0.0.1 /usr/local/lib
cd /usr/local/lib
ln -s libonejoker.so.0.0.1 libonejoker.so.0
ln -s libonejoker.so.0.0.1 libonejoker.so
ldconfig
{% endhighlight %}

That should do it. On some distributions, the OS may not always look in the @/usr/local/lib@ directory. In that case, you will also have to edit the file @/etc/ld.so.conf@ to add it. Just add @/usr/local/lib@ on a line by itself at the end of the file, then run @ldconfig@ again.

h4. Option 2: Install in personal directory

If you can't (or don't want to) install the library system-wide, you can keep it somewhere in your home directory and tell the OS to look for it there. This is handy, for example, if you want to make changes to the library. Download the "zipfile":/OneJoker/binaries/onejoker-linux-x86-0.0.1.zip as above and unpack it. This will give you a file @libonejoker.so.0.0.1@.

For the purposes of this example, assume that you want to have the library in the directory @/home/lib@, and you have copied it there. Go there and make the two symbolic links:

{% highlight bash %}
cp libonejoker.so.0.0.1
cd /home/lib
ln -s libonejoker.so.0.0.1 libonejoker.so.1
ln -s libonejoker.so.0.0.1 libonejoker.so
{% endhighlight %}

Now either add the @/home/lib@ directory to @LD_LIBRARY_PATH@, or add it to @/etc/ld.conf@, and re-cache libraries with @ldconfig@.
